[INTRO MUSIC]
>>SUE MORTER: We often
hear about the importance
of loving yourself.
And yet, in today's
image-focused world, many of us
are left with an idea
of our self-worth
that is based on
others' standards.
According to our
guest today, this
leads us away from
our true selves
and can cause great
psychological suffering.
Dr. Margaret Paul is a
psychologist and bestselling
author who developed her
inner-bonding program,
30 years ago.
Inner bonding, which teaches
people to love themselves,
has helped countless people
identify and rapidly heal
the root cause of their pain and
learn a path to joy and loving
relationships.
Thanks so much for
being here, Margaret.
>>MARGARET PAUL: No, thank you.
It's an honor.
>>SUE: Wonderful.
So can you tell us just a
little bit about your background
and how did you
come to your work?
>>PAUL: Well, like
so many people,
I grew up in a very
dysfunctional family.
When I was five,
my mother took me
to a psychiatrist, who
did a terrible job.
And I said, I can do
a better job than him.
>>SUE: At five?
>>PAUL: Yeah, that's when I
decided to be a therapist.
And I practiced
traditionally for 17 years,
and I wasn't happy.
So that's when I started
to pray for a process,
and that's when I met my best
friend Dr. Erika Chopich.
She had half of it.
I had half of it.
Spirit helped put it together.
And out came inner bonding.
I've been practicing
it ever since,
and it's been life changing
for me and millions of people
around the world.
>>SUE: Oh, wonderful.
Now you were unsatisfied with
your traditional psychological
therapeutic approach.
Can you just say a little bit
about that, what that meant?
>>PAUL: First of all, there
is no spiritual aspect,
and there is really no healing
without a spiritual connection.
We have to be able to access
that love in order to heal.
And traditional
psychotherapy does not
help you take responsibility
for your feelings.
I was in all kinds of
therapy for so many years.
Nobody told me I was
responsible for my feelings.
Nobody told me how to access
a higher source of love,
and wisdom, and truth.
So it's very, very different.
And this works.
This works fast, and deep,
and people can learn it,
and they don't have to always
keep going to a therapist
in order to be OK.
>>SUE: Fabulous.
So I know personal
responsibility
is scary for some people.
They don't know what that means.
So we'll definitely
be getting into,
how do I make a distinction
between me being
responsible for my own
feelings versus being
responsible for an entire
thing that's happening.
So we'll dig into that.
But I know that a
lot of your work
centers on self-abandonment.
And can you just
speak a little bit
about what that is
for people and how
it shows up in our lives?
>>PAUL: Yeah, so I
have isolated four ways
that people abandon themselves.
One is, most of us have
learned to stay up in our head.
Because when we were little, we
couldn't manage our feelings,
and they're in the body.
So we stay up in our head.
But, like, if a child comes
to you and they're upset
and you're just on your
computer or you're reading,
they're going to feel abandoned.
You're not attending to them.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>PAUL: Well, it's the same
thing on the inner level.
We have a feeling.
And we're on our computer,
and we're ignoring it.
That's a form of
self-abandonment.
We judge ourselves harshly.
We tell ourselves things
like, I'm not good enough.
What's the matter?
Said the wrong thing,
nobody's going to like me.
If we treated others that
way, they would feel awful.
If we treat a child that way,
they would feel abandoned.
>>SUE: And Margaret
this is huge.
Because everybody does this.
>>PAUL: I know.
>>SUE: Everybody is constantly
doing this to themselves.
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>SUE: And you're
saying, this is it.
This is a sign that
we are automatically
in that state of
self-abandonment.
>>PAUL: We're already
rejecting ourselves
when we judge ourselves.
And then, of course, we're
afraid that other people are
going to do it to us, but we've
already done it to ourselves.
>>SUE: Right, the worst
has already happened.
>>PAUL: That's right.
So the third way is, we
turn to various addictions,
we numb out our feelings--
food, alcohol, drugs, sex,
pornography, shopping,
spending, work--
all kinds of things,
even meditation--
when we're using it to
avoid responsibility
for our feelings.
It's a way of numbing out.
>>SUE: So are these what
you would call the symptoms
of self-abandonment?
>>PAUL: Well, these are the
forms of self-abandonment.
One more is that we make
other people responsible.
We hand over to them--
you know, it's your fault
I'm feeling this way.
That's a form of
self-abandonment.
>>SUE: Yes, indeed.
And usually, people
are so busy doing
their compensatory behaviors
that they can't even
notice these
feelings that you're
describing that would be the
sure sign that I'm probably
headed for trouble here.
>>PAUL: Well, but
then they feel them,
and they say-- they go to
a psychiatrist who says,
take this medication and
[? no mount ?] the feelings.
You don't want to feel
anxious or depressed,
rather than recognize that
these feelings are information
that we're abandoning ourselves.
>>SUE: Yes.
So you've certainly
had lots of experience.
You've been in practice
for a long time.
>>PAUL: Yes, a long time.
>>SUE: And you've
seen it all, I'm sure.
>>PAUL: Right.
>>SUE: And we so appreciate
your bringing your wisdom here.
Tell me, what, in
your perspective,
is it that causes people
to abandon themselves
in the first place?
Let's just go back
to the beginning.
How does it start?
What happens?
>>PAUL: Well, first of all, it's
role modeled in our families.
I mean, I never saw
my parents say, gee,
I wonder why I'm
feeling this way.
I better go inside and
see what I'm doing.
>>SUE: Right.
>>PAUL: They just
abandon themselves.
And so I learned to
do the same thing.
But also, when
we're young, there's
a lot of things that happen.
We get hurt.
We get rejected.
And we have a lot of what I
call the "core, painful feelings
of life--" the heartbreak,
the grief, the helplessness,
the loneliness.
We can't manage those
when we're young.
And if we don't learn to
do that from our parents
or they're not there
for us during that time,
we have to avoid our feelings,
and so we learn to do that.
>>SUE: To survive?
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>SUE: Yeah, this
is very similar
to work that I talk
about as a splat.
We just splat when we arrive.
We don't know how
to deal with life.
We don't know what's what.
And we just do our best.
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>SUE: And we create this
other version of ourselves
that is this the
survivor way of being.
I believe that you reference
it as the ego-wounded self.
Can you speak about and
define this for our viewers,
the ego-wounded self in your--
>>PAUL: Yeah, this
is the part of us
that absorbed so many false
beliefs about ourselves, what's
wrong with us, about being able
to have control over others,
about spirit, about
so many things.
These false beliefs get
lodged in the lower part
of the brain, the amygdala.
And this was our survival.
But now what happens is that
that wounded self, that's
like this chatter back there--
you better be
perfect, you better
do it right, putting
all this pressure
on us, that's what causes so
many of these wounded feelings.
And so this part of
us needs healing.
We don't want to operate
out of these false beliefs.
>>SUE: It's all based in
survivorship and protectivism,
basically.
>>PAUL: Yeah, this part of
us just wants to control--
wants to control how
people feel about us,
wants to control our feelings,
wants to control outcomes--
doesn't realize that that's
not a very good idea.
>>SUE: Trying to create safety.
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>SUE: I mean, it's reasonable
that people are doing this,
but it's just not going to work.
It just doesn't work
in the long run.
>>PAUL: No, it may have worked
a little bit as we were growing
up, but now it's the opposite.
It makes us feel awful.
>>SUE: And then,
speaking of growing up,
you also speak about
this adult self, this
loving adult. Can you lay
that out for our viewers
so that we can start
to get this idea,
OK, I have this part of me
that's trying to control things
and is worried and trying to
avoid the pain, et cetera,
and then there's, apparently,
this other part of me that's
OK.
And can you just
define this for us?
>>PAUL: Yeah, so
the loving adult--
see, in inner bonding,
there's two intentions.
One is the intention to
control, and the other
is the intention to learn about
loving ourselves and sharing
our love.
The loving adult is who we are
when we're in that intention
to learn about love,
and we're connected
to a higher source of love.
And so then, this
is the part of us
that takes loving action for us.
Rather than wanting to get love
and avoid pain, this part of us
learns to love ourselves and
share our love with others.
>>SUE: So does this
loving adult, then,
observe these other
behaviors and just say,
I'm just not going
to bite into that?
I'm going to do
something else instead.
I'm going to learn
something that I
didn't know about myself, and
my self-worth, and my OKness.
>>PAUL: Well, the loving
adult is the part of us
that learns to get
inside the body,
becomes aware of these
wounded feelings like anxiety
or depression, and then does
the inner bonding process
to explore, well, how
am I treating myself?
What am I telling myself?
That's causing this,
and then learning
to go to our higher
guidance for,
what's the truth about these
beliefs, and what loving action
can I take, and then
takes the action.
>>SUE: Boy, you're
singing my song.
I absolutely love this
conversation truly.
So let's go back
just a little bit
to what are some of the
results of self-abandonment
on one's self?
What happens here within
once that is happening?
>>PAUL: Well, I mean,
obviously, we're stressed,
and stress causes
a lot of illness.
So illness can be
one of the results.
Like I said, the anxiety,
the depression, unhappiness,
stress--
we just feel bad.
We get stuck.
We can't manifest well.
We're in a low frequency, what
I call "low frequency," when
we're abandoning ourselves,
and that's just not a fun way
to live.
And plus, it has a horrible
effect on relationships.
>>SUE: Yeah, that was going
to be my next question.
What impact does that roll
out into the relationships
of our lives if we're not
home to ourselves, and feeling
afraid, and
compensating for that?
How does that get projected onto
relationships and what happens?
>>PAUL: Well, the
problem is that we
attracted our common level of
self-love or self abandonment.
So if we're
abandoning ourselves,
we're going to attract somebody
who's abandoning themselves.
Then, we're getting into the
relationship to get love.
Rather than to learn,
to grow, and share love,
we want to get love.
Well, when two people get into
a relationship to get love,
it's a disaster.
It never works.
Because you're always
blaming the other person
for not loving you in the
way that you want to be loved
rather than learning to
bring that into yourself
and share that
with your partner.
So I've been working with
couples for over 50 years,
and this is the main
issue is self-abandonment.
And when people learn to love,
and see, and value themselves,
define their own worth
instead of saying, well, you
have to love me for me to be OK,
I mean, this is a huge issue--
that I need your approval
in order for me to be OK.
>>SUE: It's like trying to
fill an unfillable hole.
>>PAUL: That's right.
It's a bottomless pit.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>PAUL: And it causes
a lot of conflict
that never gets resolved.
>>SUE: So tell us a little
bit about your inner bonding
program itself.
>>PAUL: Well, like I said, I
was unhappy with the therapy,
and I just started to
pray for a process,
and spirit brought
it in, actually.
>>SUE: Yeah, so then
shows up in your life,
you guys start talking, you
put this program together?
>>PAUL: Right.
And so step one is getting
present in your body
with your feelings and wanting
responsibility for them.
And step two is that
you move into your heart
and you make a decision
to be open to learning
rather than trying to control.
And you learn to
open to bringing
in the love and compassion
of your higher guidance
because we don't
generate compassion.
We open to it.
And then step three
is, we dialogue,
like with a child who's upset.
We say, what's
the matter, honey?
Is there something
that I'm doing?
We do that with ourselves.
What am I telling you?
How am I treating you that's
causing you to feel this way?
And then, we go deeper
into the ego-wounded self.
Why are you putting pressure?
Why are you judging?
Why are you avoiding
the feelings?
What is your belief?
And this is where we
uncover the false beliefs.
Step four, we learn to go
to our higher guidance,
and I teach people how to do
this, and we ask two questions.
What is the truth about any
of the beliefs that I've
uncovered?
And what is loving to me?
What's the loving action?
What's in my highest good?
Step five is, we do
it, we take the action.
And step six, we tune
in, and we see how
we feel as a result of that.
And if we indeed are
loving ourselves,
we will feel a lot of relief.
>>SUE: What are you
wanting to teach people
by this whole process first?
And then I want to ask you some
questions about the process.
But what's the overarching
thing that you want them
to glean from the inner body--
>>PAUL: You know, what I
really want them to get
is how incredible they are.
I want them to know who
they are in their soul.
>>SUE: To learn
their magnificence.
>>PAUL: Yeah, I mean, we are
so incredible in our soul.
But we haven't been
mirrored by our parents.
And unless we learn to
access our higher guidance,
we're trying to get
it from other people.
But as we learn to access the
truth from our higher guidance,
we learn to see who we are, and
we learn to act from that soul
instead of from
that wounded mind.
That makes all the
difference in the world.
>>SUE: Mm-hm.
So can you take us
through the steps,
again, just to allow this to
have real clarity for people.
Because we're living
at a time where there's
a lot of conversation
about, you need
to find your limiting
beliefs, and get rid of them,
and establish better
beliefs in their place.
And people are like, OK,
I have to go do that.
And many people do not
know how to do that.
And I love what you just shared.
And I'd love for you to walk us
through it step by step again.
>>PAUL: OK, so let's say
that you're feeling anxious,
and you tune in,
oh, I feel tight
because lots of times feelings
show up physically in the body,
so the stomach is tighter
or the chest is tight.
There's a tightness in the body.
Maybe your neck or
your back is tight.
OK, so you might
say, OK, I'm anxious.
You breathe in in step one.
You use your breath to take
you inside and get present.
It's like sitting with
a child who's hurting.
And so then, in step two,
we breathe into our heart.
We consciously open to learning
about loving ourselves.
It has to start with ourselves.
Because so many of
us are caretakers.
We focus on loving
the other person.
>>SUE: Totally.
>>PAUL: We get lost in here.
And when we're doing
that, we're actually
trying to get love, rather
than love ourselves first.
We have to fill ourselves
with love first.
>>SUE: Excellent.
So first step is--
>>PAUL: First step is
get present in your body
and with your feelings.
>>SUE: I'm feeling
this thing, frahhh,
I'm going to come in
here and breathe with it.
>>PAUL: And breathe with it.
>>SUE: Step two?
>>PAUL: Step two,
open to learning.
>>SUE: Oh, I gotta open to
learning instead of jumping
to protecting myself.
>>PAUL: Yeah.
>>SUE: I'm going to just open.
>>PAUL: Proetcting,
avoiding, controlling.
>>SUE: OK, I could knee-jerk
into it, but I'm not going to.
>>PAUL: That's right.
>>SUE: I'm going to breathe.
>>PAUL: I'm going
to open to learning.
>>SUE: I'm going to
be open to learning.
>>PAUL: --about loving myself.
>>SUE: And loving myself.
>>PAUL: Yeah, and then we invite
spirit in simply by saying,
I invite in love and compassion.
>>SUE: Is that part of step two?
>>PAUL: Yeah, part of step two.
Open to learning, I invite
in love and compassion.
>>SUE: Inviting in higher power.
>>PAUL: Right, so
then step three,
I'm asking this part
of me that's anxious,
what am I telling you?
How am I treating you
that's causing this?
And then, I go inside and I let
the answer come from inside.
So we can call this the
inner child, the soul self,
the essence, the feeling
self, whatever you want.
But--
>>SUE: The one who
got left behind.
We know that for sure.
>>PAUL: That's right.
That's right.
So then that part
might say, well, you're
putting all this pressure on me.
You're telling me I
got to be perfect.
I have to do everything right.
I better not make a mistake.
Everybody's got to
like me or I'm not OK.
And there's all kinds
of things we do.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>PAUL: But we're listening
for what are we doing.
So let's say we're putting a
lot of pressure on ourselves
and telling ourselves, we've
got to do everything right.
Then, we go a
little deeper and we
ask that wounded
part of ourselves,
why are you doing this?
Why are you putting
on this pressure?
And the wounded self might
say, well, this is the only way
that I can get approval,
and I need approval
in order to be OK.
This will give me control.
If I do everything
right, I can have
control over how other
people feel about me.
This is a very deep belief
for a lot of people.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>PAUL: So then
once you understand
what you're doing,
then step four,
you open to learning with
your higher guidance.
And opening to learning about
love raises the frequency.
And if you're eating
well and your body's
in a high enough
frequency, you can actually
access that
information and spirit.
It's always here for us.
But most people don't
know how to access it.
And so they were asking,
well, what's the truth?
Can I really control how
people feel about me?
If I do everything
right, do I have control
over how people feel about me?
And if you're tuned
in, your guidance says,
do people have control over
how you feel about them?
Or do you decide
that all by yourself?
No, actually, you don't
have that control.
You're working really
hard for nothing.
>>SUE: Yeah, it can't be done.
>>PAUL: Can't be done.
And so then we say, what
would be loving to me?
And we access that.
And so what spirit might say
is, get yourself off the hook.
Tell yourself it's
OK to make a mistake.
It's OK to be human.
I tell myself all the
time, hey, make mistakes,
fall on your face, fail, I'm
going to love you anyway.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>PAUL: It's OK.
>>PAUL: And that lets me
be relaxed about things.
>>SUE: Yeah, so we have
a video of you leading
a woman through the
steps of inner bonding
at one of your workshops, yes?
>>PAUL: Yeah.
>>SUE: Let's take a look.
>>PAUL: OK.
So what's really
happening here is
that you learned so long
ago to try and take care
of everybody else to get love.
But in doing that, you're
abandoning your little girl,
and she's feeling
unloved by you.
And that's why she's hurting.
She's feeling unloved.
>> And I don't know
how to lover her.
>>PAUL: Right.
You don't know how to love her.
You know how to take
care of everybody else,
but you don't know how
to love her, right?
>> No, because I don't
think she's good.
You know what I mean?
I tell myself all the
time, I'm not good enough.
I'm not--
>>PAUL: Oh, OK, so there's
one of the false beliefs.
I'm not good enough.
>> Right.
>>PAUL: I want you to ask
god if that's at all true,
if there's any way that it
could be true, that who you are
and your soul is
not good enough.
>> He thinks I'm good enough.
>>PAUL: Yeah.
OK, so who are you
going to believe?
You're going to believe your
four-year-old wounded self who
decided you weren't good enough
or you're going to believe God?
>> I'm going to believe God.
>>PAUL: OK, good.
Now ask God, what's
the first thing
that I need to do for
my little girl for her
to start to feel
my love for her?
What's one thing?
What would be one thing?
>> I don't know.
I don't know.
>>PAUL: OK, if you
had a little girl--
do you have children?
>> Yeah.
>>PAUL: OK.
And do you have a little girl?
Or did you have a girl?
>> She's 23.
>>PAUL: OK.
>> She's always going
to be my little girl.
>>PAUL: OK.
So when she was little and
she came to you hurting,
what would you do?
>> I'd hug her, love her.
>>PAUL: That's right.
OK.
So the first thing--
to get yourself a doll or a
stuffed animal and hug her,
the same thing you
would do with a child.
Just hug her and let her
know that she's not alone.
Isn't that what you
do with your kids?
>> Yeah.
>>PAUL: You let them know
you were there, right?
>> Yeah.
>>PAUL: So you know
how to do that, right?
>> I hope I do.
>>PAUL: Yeah, well you did.
I can see that you did.
>> Oh, I love her to death.
>>PAUL: Yeah, I can
see that you did.
And you held them?
>> I didn't want to
leave the same prints.
>>PAUL: Yeah, that's right.
And I don't think you did.
But your child needs the same
thing as you gave your kids.
She needs you to
hug her and let her
know you're there, she's not
alone, and that she's good.
>>SUE: [SIGH] Beautiful.
>>PAUL: Thank you.
>>SUE: So what are the
results for one's self going
through inner body?
>>PAUL: You know, the results
are absolutely amazing.
We have a sense of freedom.
We don't feel alone inside.
Our creativity soars.
We're no longer
afraid of intimacy.
You know, so many people
are afraid of rejection.
They're afraid of
losing the other person.
losing themselves.
But when we develop
a loving adult,
we don't give ourselves
up, so we're no longer
afraid of losing ourselves.
We don't take
rejection personally
because we're not
rejecting ourselves.
And so our relationships
improve so much.
We're able to manifest our
dreams because we're operating
from a much higher frequency.
We're operating out of
love and out of truth
rather than out of fear.
And this is what enables us to
be creative and manifest what
we want in our lives.
My life has changed like--
I can't even tell you how
much my life has changed
from learning to love myself.
It's just absolutely amazing.
This is where joy is.
This is where peace is.
>>SUE: And sometimes
people who haven't
been able to be self-loving,
they would feel they're
being selfish if
they're not continuing
to be the caretaker,
or the do-gooder,
or they make-it-worker
kind of person.
And so it's important
for people to realize
that you're not being selfish.
You're being self-responsible.
It's responsible stewardship
to reclaim our power,
to choose our felt
sensations, our feelings,
our dispositions in the world.
>>PAUL: Well, and to become
more loving human beings
on the planet.
Selfishness is actually when
we're expecting other people
to give themselves up
and take care of us,
rather than taking
responsibility for ourselves.
And selfishness is when we
don't care about the effect
our behavior has
on other people,
and that's never loving to us.
When we love
ourselves, we deeply
care about the effect our
behavior has on others.
It's not a, well, I'm just
going to take care of me,
and I don't care about you.
It's not that at all.
That's not loving to ourselves.
>>SUE: Yeah, I think
that's important
when people are
trying to navigate
a new distinction for
themselves, that it's not
all or nothing.
I'm not saying it's
not about you at all.
I'm just saying, it needs
to be about me, too,
and then managing
that effectively.
What are one of the
most empowering things
for relationships that comes
from inner bonding work?
>>PAUL: Well, what happens
with people when they're
taking responsibility
for themselves
is that they get to share love.
I mean, their sex life improves.
I've worked with people who
haven't had sex for years.
And as they start
to love themselves,
they start to be able to see
the beauty in the other person.
What happens in so
many relationships
is that they fall
in love with who
they are in their core essence.
But then, of course, the
wounded self takes over,
and nobody likes
anybody's wounded self.
And so the relationship
goes downhill.
But as they learn
to see who they are,
they also learn to see who
the other person is and learn
to value the essence
in the other person
and to share love
from that perspective.
They start to have fun.
They start to play.
They're able to learn
and grow together,
which is one of the great
things about relationships.
I've just worked
with people who've
been married for
a very long time,
and they thought
that it was over.
But if even just one person
decides to love themselves,
the whole system shifts and
everything can get better.
Can't guarantee it.
Because sometimes when
you love yourself,
the other person says, oh, I
just want to be taken care of
or I just want to be in control,
and the relationship's over,
and you have to be
willing to take that risk.
But most of the time,
it gets so much better.
>>SUE: Yeah, I think this is
comforting for our viewers
to hear, that you might
think it's over, doesn't have
to be over, and
if it is over, it
will be OK because it's
what's meant to be.
And you have a
better sense of self
to be able to navigate
something like that.
>>PAUL: Yeah,
everything changes when
you stop trying to
control the other person.
Control is a big thing
in relationships,
and nobody likes
to be controlled.
And people create this system--
one person is trying to control,
the other is giving themselves
up, and then angry about it
or resisting and withdrawing,
and then the other
person feels rejected.
That just doesn't work.
>>SUE: It just goes
back and forth.
>>PAUL: Yeah, back and forth.
And so when you stop
trying to control
and you learn to
love yourself, you
don't want to control once
you're loving yourself.
You just want to share love.
And that changes everything.
>>SUE: This is a
seven-day course, right?
>>PAUL: It's a
Anybody can take it.
>>SUE: That's a
very comprehensive,
complimentary program that
you're offering to the world.
>>PAUL: I want everybody
to be doing this.
I want the world to be happy.
>>SUE: I think I know the
answer to this question,
but I have to ask
it for our viewers.
Who should take this course?
Who would benefit
from inner bonding?
>>PAUL: Yeah, everybody.
I mean, there isn't
anybody that doesn't
have pain in their lives.
There isn't anybody that's
not abandoning themselves
in some ways.
So everybody can benefit
from learning inner bonding.
>>SUE: Now you have a
book about inner bonding.
Can you tell us about this?
>>PAUL: Yeah, so "The
Inner Bonding Workbook"
is the last book that I wrote.
If people work
through that, they're
going to be amazed at what
happens in their lives.
This whole book was channeled.
I brought it through
from the spirit.
>>SUE: Oh, beautiful.
>>PAUL: Yeah.
>>SUE: We have, joining
us on Skype, one of Dr.
Paul's long-term clients
and close friend--
motivational speaker,
best-selling author,
and dear friend of mine
as well, Marci Schimoff.
Welcome, Marci.
>>MARCI SCHIMOFF: Hi, great
to be with both of you.
>>SUE: We're absolutely thrilled
to have you here with us today.
Thank you so much
for taking the time
to speak with us
about Margaret's
program and your work.
Can you share with
us how you first
came to connect with Margaret?
>>SCHIMOFF: Actually, it
was probably 40 years ago
that I heard of Margaret.
I was living in the same city in
California, and I went to her--
I think Margaret was probably my
first therapist that I went to,
but I only lived there
for a short time,
so that was short lived.
But I loved her work.
And then, more recently
in the last 10 years,
I've become very familiar
with the inner bonding work,
and I actually invited her
to work with these groups
that I work with,
these groups of women
that I work with in
Living a Miraculous Life,
and Margaret has been fantastic.
Her program has just truly
impacted so many people
that I actually said,
OK, I gotta do this.
If they're getting that
much benefit from it,
I better try this.
I want to see what
they're having.
And I've used this now in my own
life for probably five years.
It's been life-changing.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Can you share with
us a little bit
about your own personal
experience with inner bonding
and what has unfolded for you?
>>SCHIMOFF: Yes, absolutely.
So I have, historically,
throughout my life, been
a great controller of life.
I thought that everything
that was going to happen,
if it was going
to happen, it was
gonna happen through my effort,
my control, my hanging on,
my pushing through,
and I like to say
that I used to feel like
I was the general manager
of the universe.
And that was the only way that
things were going to work.
And as you know,
actually, I've been
able to manifest a
good amount of success.
But with that, there was always
a lot of anxiety and not as
much fulfillment as you
would expect from having
that kind of success.
And there was this disconnect.
And I started feeling like,
I want to see if I can--
how life is a different way.
And Margaret really, the
inner bonding process
is, for me, the biggest
antidote to living
a life of controlling because
it's really about bonding
with my higher self.
And as I've learned to hear the
old patterns, the old voices,
the voices of the wounded child,
and shift to listening more
to my divine connection,
my sense of my higher self,
I actually let go more.
And miraculously, more
good stuff happens.
More magic happens in
that letting-go space.
Plus, I feel better.
So it's a much more
fulfilling kind of a flow.
>>SUE: Yeah, it's so
challenging, Marci,
for people such as yourself
because you are very bright,
and you do have a lot of
capacity to make things work.
And so we figure, if I can
make things work by operating
this way, if I do
it more, they'll
even work better or more
things will work in my favor.
And there's this point
where that's not the case.
And so how would you share that
your inner feeling has changed,
your relationship with
self has changed as you,
in those moments, decide to
take your foot off the gas
and trust a higher power?
What happens for you?
>>SCHIMOFF: Yeah, so
it's really interesting
because I've actually always
had a fairly clear connection
to my higher self,
but I just haven't
been in a pattern, the
habit of going there.
It's like a well-worn groove.
I've been in the groove
of going to the fear,
the anxiety, the pressure.
And now, I notice it.
That's the very first thing.
I notice, oh, that's
where I'm going.
And rather than going, uh, I'm
going there again and beating
myself up, I just relax
and I go, OK, let me just--
let me shift, and let
me go to my higher
self, my divine connection.
And everything
inside just shifts.
Now I'm not perfect.
What it is it's a matter
of creating new habits.
And the inner bonding process
is such a brilliant way
of helping create
those new habits.
And I have to tell you,
probably the person
that's the happiest that I'm
doing this-- besides myself
and my own experience--
is my partner, Sergio,
who, in our relationship, I
have been very, very, very
controlling.
And it's not that I don't
still go towards that pattern,
but I'm very aware of it.
And whenever I am,
I take a breath,
I check in with my
body, I do this process,
I take responsibility
for how I'm feeling,
and I connect in
to my higher self.
And it's such a difference
in how life happens.
It's a difference in
my inner experience.
It's a difference
in what manifests
both in my relationship
and in my work.
And I have to say,
Sue, you are also
an extraordinary embodiment
of living this way.
As some people
will probably know,
Sue and I actually co-lead
a program together called
"Your Year of Miracles."
It's about living
a miraculous life.
And I have seen this
process of inner bonding
with myself, have such an
effect on how I show up
in that program and how
the decisions that I
make, the choices, they come
from a much more connected
place.
I feel like I'm having many
more of these sort of downloads,
rather than pushing
and pressuring.
And I just--
I thank you, Margaret, so
much for the great blessing
of your work.
And I thank you, Sue,
so much, for living
in this way to
such a great degree
yourself because you're both
such an inspiration to me.
>>SUE: Oh, well,
thank you, Marci.
It's a great, great joy.
And I just want to go back just
a second here and connect with,
just to share with people,
how do you catch yourself
in the moment?
What is it?
Is it something you say,
or something you do,
or something you feel,
so that our viewers can
have an idea of, hey,
I want what she's got.
I want to have what
Marci's been describing,
what Margaret's been
teaching, and what
you're sharing about
how we're operating,
I want to have that, too.
How do I know how to
interrupt what I've been doing
so that I can start doing this?
>>SCHIMOFF: Well, the very
first step is feeling your body.
And I know when my body
is tight that I'm probably
telling myself something that
is not kind of loving to myself.
So I just, I listen to my body.
And as soon as that,
[GASP],, anxiety,
or that shortness of breath, or
that holding starts to happen,
I go, OK, what's going on here?
And the body is the pathway
in to knowing when something's
a little bit off.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>SCHIMOFF: And so I just
stop, and I feel that,
and I go, OK, what
am I telling myself?
And then I shift to--
I do the practice, the
process that Margaret teaches.
>>SUE: Yes, wonderful.
Thank you.
Who would you recommend
take Margaret's work?
Who would you refer to Margaret?
What do you
recommend for people?
>>SCHIMOFF: Well, I
can't imagine that it
wouldn't work for everybody.
I think it's an extremely
universal process,
but it has to be somebody
who's actually wants
to make a shift in their life.
So, obviously, you can't
force change upon anybody.
It has to come from within.
But anybody who's
struggling, I think,
in any area of their
life, whether it's
with their relationship,
or with their work,
or with their own
sense of self-love.
I used to teach self esteem.
And to me, this
work on self-love
is such a deeper place.
Self esteem is about
getting approval.
It's about liking yourself.
There's nothing wrong with that.
But self-love and this work is
such a deeper, deeper process.
It's also for anybody
who has challenges,
I think, with their
help, with their body,
with their eating patterns.
I've noticed differences in
this with my own relationship
with food.
So I've seen it work
with so many people
that I've shared it with, so
I think it's quite universal.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
What would you say is
the most profound piece
of Margaret's work?
>>SCHIMOFF: I mean, the
whole process, I think,
works together, but ultimately,
for me, the most profound piece
is connecting to our
connecting to our higher self.
That's where all the juices.
That's where the miracles are.
That's where the magic is.
And this process
allows that to happen.
In fact, every
year, as you know,
Sue, I pick a
theme for the year.
It's part of your Year
of Miracles program.
And my theme this year
is divine connection.
Because for me, it's all about
connection to my higher self.
And that's where the
juice really is in life.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Thank you so much,
Marci, for your thoughts,
your sharing, your deep
sharing with us today.
It means so much to
all of our viewers
to be able to hear
that even people
with tremendous successes
have the same issues
that everyone else has,
that everyone on the planet
is really here to
learn how to self-love.
And thank you for your
time in sharing with us--
>>PAUL: Can I say
one thing here?
Marci, I so honor
you for your courage.
Because you're one of those
people who have been very, very
successful through the pushing,
through the controlling.
And I think it takes so much
courage to actually let go.
And I know that for so
many people, it's hard.
Well, I've succeeded this way.
Why should I let go?
But you decided you didn't
want to feel the anxiety,
and you've taken the risk,
and you're letting go.
And I just so
honor you for that.
>>SCHIMOFF: Thank you, Margaret.
Well, thank you for
helping guide that because,
truly, being the general
manager of the universe
is not that much fun.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SUE: You can
take some time off.
>>SCHIMOFF: Yeah, exactly.
>>SUE: You can take a vacation.
Excellent.
Thank you so much for
being with us, Marci.
We're blessed to have you.
>>SCHIMOFF: Thank you.
>>SUE: Wow.
Well, that is phenomenal, and
such a testament to your work,
and certainly
something that I know
will help our viewers
around the world.
So a beautiful, beautiful
connection that you have there.
>>PAUL: Yes, thank you.
>>SUE: And Marci has been
a dear friend in my life.
And I hear your work
come through her
when she's working with
the thousands of people
around the world that we're
speaking with every month
and asking them, what's the
most loving thing that you could
do for yourself in this moment?
And it's just a
beautiful reflection
of what you're passing down.
It's been a long time
you've been putting
this work together,
and it's going out
into the world in
all kinds of ways.
So wonderful.
So you speak about
energy frequency
as well, which is another topic
very near and dear to my heart.
What can you share with us about
how you came to explore that?
>>PAUL: Well, there came a
period of time in my life where
I knew--
see, I was raised
by atheist parents.
I was a spiritual kid,
but they didn't help that.
And at some point, I knew
there was something there,
but I didn't know
how to access it.
When I was in my early '20s--
I had been a sickly kid.
And so in my early '20s, I
started reading about health,
and I changed everything,
threw everything out,
started eating just
organic everything.
I was listening to
tapes, how to connect,
and I couldn't get there.
Then, inner bonding came in.
And I understood
about the intention
to learn about loving myself.
And suddenly, I had
that connection.
So I thought it was
about the intention
to learn about loving myself.
So I started to teach
my clients about that.
Didn't work.
And then, I realized it's
both the energy in your body,
that you have to be eating
clean you can't be putting junk
food in and have
a high frequency,
and you have to be open to
learning about loving yourself.
And that's the magic.
And when people are doing
both, their frequency
is high enough to access
their higher guidance.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
It's all connected.
>>PAUL: It's all connected.
>>SUE: Interconnected.
>>PAUL: Right, that's right.
>>SUE: So tell us about
this book as well,
your "Diet for
Divine Connection,"
which is yet another
one of your works
that are serving people
around the world.
What can you tell us about it?
>>PAUL: Yeah, so the subtitle
is "Beyond Junk Food and Junk
Thoughts To At-Will
Divine Connection."
And that's really
what it's about.
The first part is about food,
and I teach people a lot.
I don't recommend
a particular diet
because everybody's got
their own philosophy.
But I do teach people how to
find out what's right for them
and to eat clean, organic food.
That's so essential.
That's the first
part of the book.
The second part
teaches inner bonding.
So we can't be putting
junk foods in our body,
and we can't be putting the junk
thoughts from our wounded self
and expect to be able to
connect to our guidance.
Our frequency is too low.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>PAUL: And frequency
is like if you
walk into a room of angry
people, that's a low frequency.
You walk into a room of
loving people, that's
a high frequency.
You can feel the energy of that.
I just turned 80 this year.
So I know that all this works.
It works when you're eating
really well, all organic.
It works when you
get enough exercise.
And it works when you're
staying tuned into your feelings
and taking
responsibility for them
so that you're peaceful,
not anxious and depressed.
>>SUE: I just have
to back up here.
80 years old, and you are
vital, you are flourishing,
I feel like you're
just getting started.
>>PAUL: [LAUGHS] I know.
>>SUE: You're an amazing
little skyrocket here.
And so I would think
that people would
want to listen to what
you have to say about--
>>PAUL: Well, I hope so.
And that's why I
tell people my age
because I want them
to be inspired.
You don't have to get decrepit.
You don't have to
lose your energy
if you are willing to take
responsibility physically,
emotionally, and spiritually.
>>SUE: Yes.
So where does the idea of
self-worth fit into your work?
>>PAUL: Well, that's exactly
what I was just referring to.
It's basic.
When we learn to go
to our higher guidance
and we learn to define our
own worth intrinsically--
see, unfortunately, so many
people define their worth
by how they look and
by their performance,
by their achievements, by
externals and by other people's
approval.
But when you learn to tap
into your higher guidance,
you learn to define yourself
intrinsically, who you are--
your kindness, your caring, your
compassion, your creativity,
your particular form
of intelligence,
your honesty, your
loyalty, there's
so many intrinsic qualities.
And we each have our own gifts.
And there's another issue
here that's dear to my heart,
and that is the whole issue of
what's happening to our climate
change.
We treat our planet the
way we treat ourselves.
We're junking up ourselves.
We're junking up our planet.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>PAUL: We're going to treat
the outer terrain the way
we're treating
the inner terrain.
So it's so important,
if we want this planet
to heal, to heal ourselves.
>>SUE: It's all one thing.
>>PAUL: It's all one thing.
>>SUE: Yeah.
If we're to have that
spiritual guidance,
we're connecting
to the universe,
we have to recognize that we
are a presence of the universe.
And as such, we then are
able to care about things
other than our
own survival, then
can care about the
planet and others.
>>PAUL: Yes.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
How can people learn more
about you and your work?
>>PAUL: Well, they can go to
the website at innerbonding.com.
That's where they can
get the free course.
And there's many other
courses that I teach.
I work with people.
I have facilitators.
We have a fabulous
facilitior training program,
so there's many facilitators.
I teach workshops and
five-day intensives,
three-day intensives.
I have many books
that people can read.
There's many, many ways.
But if they go on
the website, there's
thousands of articles
they can read.
There's so many
ways to get help.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
A wealth of information and a
lifetime of flourishing work.
And thank you so much.
>>PAUL: And we have a fantastic
program called "Self Quest,"
which, if people like
to work on the computer,
it will teach them this process
in a very, very in-depth way.
>>SUE: Oh, beautiful.
Beautiful.
Thank you so much, Margaret,
for being with us today.
>>PAUL: You're so welcome.
Thank you.
>>SUE: It's been a wonderful,
wonderful of connection
and hearing your great
understanding of what
it takes to live a
life uncommon, truly,
connected, inner bonding.
>>PAUL: Thank you so much.
>>SUE: Dr. Margaret
Paul's work is a testament
to just how essential
it is for each of us
to create profound
connections with ourselves,
with spirit, and with others
by tuning into our true worth
and living from a place of
self-love, a place where
real healing can occur.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
Thanks for watching
"Healing Matrix."
[OUTRO INSTRUMENTAL]